Oh
so I hope you like what I put together I
designed this to be provocative I want
you to think about this we're going to
ask some very simple questions and I
titled the talk cancer 2.0 reflecting
what I believe is this very important
revolution and understanding what what
cancer is so I just want to take a broad
survey and step back and ask the
question what is cancer and I've had
sort of a unique perspective I've
thought about this a lot and been able
to interview scientists from every
aspect the genomic side alternative
theory side and try to understand cancer
through from their viewpoint and it's
it's a for-sure what we know it's been
150 years since Rudolf Virchow first
described cancer as pathological cell
growth and 150 years later we still
don't have a consensus view of why this
is occurring we know that cancer is
unique among diseases and the fact that
most diseases can be defined by
something going wrong a very clear thing
Parkinson's disease insulin pathways but
cancer is unique in the fact that it's
it doesn't fall into this category it's
more defined by what it's doing it's
doing a lot of things the Hanahan and
Weinberg six hallmarks of cancer it's do
incredibly complex operations growing
new blood vessels going through the cell
cycle over and over and and the question
is why now when you type in a cancer the
word cancer into a PubMed search you get
over 3 million hits so we have this mass
repository of data and in my opinion
we've been bad stewards of this data and
we haven't really stepped back and
connect dots most most branches of
science have a theoretical side an
experimental side and there's nothing
like that in cancer biology we just
muddle through this data so then we'll
look at the Cancer Genome Atlas the big
sequencing effort and how it's blowing a
hole in cancer theory and then we'll
look at the emerging theories of cancer
as Tom's so elegantly described as one
of them and then this notion of what I
call cancer 2.0 which describes cancer
as a deterministic epigenetic systemic
disease and orderly disease not a
disease of disorder and then I want to
tie it back to metabolism and will
discuss hexokinase 2 which may be the
most important effector of cancers
metabolic phenotype
so the somatic mutation theory is
tom-tom talked about is live and well
it's still the consensus view at cancer
I pulled these two excerpts to try to
capture that view ones from the Emperor
of all maladies that it's a wildly
popular bulletin who knew a book on
cancer could sell so well but I think it
kind of defined cancer for our
generation it's at that popular super
well written but if you read the book
it's he never deviates beyond the gene
centric view it's cancer is viewed as a
through-and-through genetic disease this
other was pulled from The Guardian it's
a paper by Bert vogelstein his group of
Johns Hopkins and it was reported in
most media outlets that describes
two-thirds cancer as bad luck simply
that it's the result of the errors of
DNA replication within stem cells and
nothing we can do about it it's it's a
fixed process the other third is from
germline mutations or environmental
factors so what is the somatic mutation
theory it's the reductionist theory that
begins with the cell the one renegade
cell hypothesis the cancer is clonal in
origin and it begins with DNA mutations
and this happens over decades you get
sequential hits two key oncogenes which
rewires a cellular circuitry towards
uncontrolled proliferation so what
happens when you go looking for these
mutations and that's what the Cancer
Genome Atlas Project was in 2006 this is
the typical data from the Cancer Genome
Atlas Project this was a study on breast
cancer where they sequence of tumors of
a hundred women with breast cancer so
this is the genes they determined to be
the driving genes if they can't
determine it through functional data
then they it's the frequency of mutation
these are point mutations copy mutations
but the important part what caught
everybody off guard with his data was a
huge degree of inter tumoral
heterogeneity from one patient's tumor
to the next there's very few commonly
mutated genes and the other thing that
caught everybody off guard is there's
many samples with single driving
mutations two driving mutations or zero
so it's impossible to reconcile a
genetic origin with his data and Bert
vogelstein whose lab at Johns Hopkins
sequenced alongside the government
effort wrote a review in 2013 asking
this question where are the missing
mutations and he goes on in the article
2 to describe what he calls Dark Matter
cancers own version there's some
presumptive force that we have yet to
identify that's driving the disease so
there's many problems with the somatic
mutation theory the missing mutations we
just talked about another is when you
measure the mutation rate within within
human cells it's very low it's
impossible to reconcile the rates of
cancer with the known rates of mutation
and so they made this ad hoc
modification that the first mutation
must be in a gene that controls DNA
repair and this just allows for the
probability for other mutations to occur
so intuitively it's impossible to
reconcile this tremendous gain of
function we see if cancer by
systematically wiping out wiping out
biological systems and this was
dramatically illustrated by a ancillary
study the Cancer Genome Atlas product it
doesn't get a lot of attention but they
went specifically looking for mutations
to correlate to metastasis the most
important feature of cancer they found
zero
they couldn't correlate a single
mutation to metastasis and that's what
the Hanahan and Weinberg model of cancer
presupposes is every every hallmark of
cancer is driven by our genes but but
they can't find them so Tom's theory
that he'll do a better job describing
the night than I can but it's simply
that the same causes that we've always
known the same triggers damaged
mitochondria and then the once you reach
a threshold level of mitochondrial
damage there's an epigenetic signal to
the nucleus a retrograde response this
upregulates key oncogenes cancer begins
subsequent to that is genomic
instability so it's an epiphenomenon not
the true driver and this theory goes so
far to explaining all the holes from the
somatic mutation theory as we just learn
and it agrees with that elegant series
of nuclear transfer experiments so what
I always cite is when they take the
nucleus of the cancer cell put it in a
normal cell and inject them in the mice
and there's no cancer and when you flip
it take the nucleus of a normal cell put
it in an ending a cancer cell inject
them in the mice and it's nine out of
ten ninety seven percent get cancer so
very powerful evidence that the
cytoplasmic factors are driving the
disease another interesting theory
that's been around for a while the
tissue organization field theory states
that the default state of epithelial
cells is cell division and the
epithelium then is kept in check by the
tissue architecture field so it sort of
exerts these negative controls to keep
the epithelium from dividing but want
that once that relationship breaks down
the epithelium begins neoplastic growth
and this again goes a long way to
explaining the confounding data from the
Atlas project and it's got very
convincing experimental data when you
apply a carcinogen to the stroma and
disrupt this architecture and then
recombine epithelial cells that haven't
been exposed to a carcinogen you get
cancerous growth and when you flip it
and hit hit up ethereal cells with a
carcinogen but put them back in an
intact architecture neoplasm is
suppressed so again very very compelling
evidence so where these two theories
combine is what I call a cancer 2.0 they
combine in the notion that cancer isn't
driven by a sort of predetermined
subroutine an epigenetic disease but
this raises another huge question why
why would cancer have this pre-loaded
subroutine in its DNA what it's doing
it's it's deterministic systematic it's
unfolding some pre-programmed response
so there's kind of been a recent answer
to that question by the atavistic model
by Paul Davies and Charlie lineweaver
very elegant answer to that question I
think and in activism is simply a
evolutionary throwback it's something
that we all have it within us but it's
suppressed and so these if you haven't
heard of these two guys they're actually
both cosmologists very high-level
cosmologists Paul Davies actually worked
with Stephen Hawking for a while and
they were commissioned by the NCI ten
years ago when Anna Barker took over his
deputy director of the NCI she was
appalled by the lack of understanding in
progress treating cancer so she took
this wildly different approach and
commissioned physicists to take a look
she reckoned the cancers really defined
by its complexity and who's better at
cracking complexity than physicists so
these guys were conscripted into this
effort and began their Trek trying to
figure out what cancer
the simple question again under this
biological dictum this old biological
axiom nothing in biology makes sense
except light in the light of evolution
and so this phylogenetic tree you don't
need to pay attention to this but I just
make the point of how life populated the
planet and the planet formed 4.6 billion
years ago life began about four billion
years ago and of course it began as
unicellular life and unicellular life
was it's it's simple biological
imperative is to replicate replicative
immortality
over and over and over and then about a
billion years ago these cells begin
living in clumps multicellular living
began and they so to do that they had to
sign a contract with each other that
they repress multi replicated
immortality for the good of the
collective and then speciation took off
and we all know that species don't
reinvent themselves anew we build on our
old programs and this slide just shows
all the capabilities of life it's a
building process that develops over time
so the what Davies calls the bells and
whistles of evolution are the newest
capabilities to evolve our big brains
and so forth but embedded down in here
the earliest capabilities are still
there which is replicated in mortality
so this slide depicts the development of
a whale and of course it begins with the
fertilization of an egg which then the
cells trickle down Waddington x'
epigenetic landscape towards terminal
differentiation and there's this idea
and developmental biology that that
ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny
apparently it's somewhat controversial
but the simple idea is that embryo
Genesis reflects our evolutionary sweep
across the planet so the earliest genes
we express are the first genes to have
evolved the latest genes of terminal
differentiation are the bells and
whistles of evolution the newest genes
to evolve and because a whale will go on
this the building process it undergoes
the development program of legs but
because a whale evolved in the niche of
arm of the ocean it suppresses that
program occasionally that suppression
system get breaks down and you'll get
what's called an atavism so you'll see
whales with little rudimentary legs and
you see at divisions in nature all the
time you see snakes with legs humans
with little tail
or web feed so we can look at cancer in
the same context as an app activism so
life begins with the fertilized with a
fertilized egg totipotent cells which
trickle down towards terminal
differentiation some cells get perched
to stem cells along the way and
according to the a statistic model what
happens is cancer begins with a stem
like cell they're already perched
epigenetically closer to neoplasm you
can see this in the methylation patterns
and so forth or they revert to that
pattern and then there's there's
triggers it could be a nuclear gene
mutation it could be mitochondrial
damage it could be the disruption of the
tissue architecture then what happens is
cell Davy's likens it reverts to the
safe mode but it begins running up the
arrow of evolution backwards away from
the modern genes of multicellular living
of cooperation and towards the earliest
genes of early embryo genesis of the
genes of replicative immortality and you
can see this it's very clear we've known
this for a long time
cancer cells reexpress fetal genes
they're expressing these early genes of
embryogenesis looks a lot like cancer
it's they're highly glycolytic they're
undifferentiated the exhibit replicative
immortality so this kind of information
is Paul Davies says should be screaming
at us as significance this reexpress of
fetal genes is what's defining cancer
when life was unicellular it it's
immortal but within a multicellular
context we've we've divested are we
immortality to the germline we've
invested into the germline so the
methylation tags epigenetic signals get
wiped clean every time to go through
embryo Genesis and that's what's
happening with cancer you see a global -
methylation you see hyper methylation of
the promoter regions of tumor suppressor
genes so this has got to be wildly
significant for cancer and so how we tie
this to metabolism all of us in this
room are mostly expressing hexokinase
one it's the first enzyme of glycolysis
there's a little bit your skeletal
muscle and heart but cancer transitions
to hexokinase to the isozyme hexokinase
- and then it wildly over expresses it
and this is significant because
hexokinase - is less subject to product
inhibition from glucose 6-phosphate so
it shoves glucose down the glycolytic
pathway now this is great for
replicative immortality because it
generates all kinds of building blocks
for replication of course it's
responsible for the Warburg effect and
another effect of hexokinase - that's so
important as it binds to the Vedic
Channel the voltage-dependent an ion
channel which is associated with outer
mitochondrial membrane and when it does
this it induces a conformational change
that closes the Vidocq channel the Vedic
channel is the effector pore for
apoptosis so this one transition to an
isozyme that's pre-programmed in us is
responsible for two hallmark features of
cancer if Warburg effect and
immortalization the cell there's
probably more to immortalization but
it's certainly one one key feature and
I'd like to just illustrate most people
attribute a PET scan to overconsumption
of glucose which is true but it's more
because hexokinase to phosphorylates
glucose which is irreversible reaction
and this is what bloats the cancer cells
so when you see a PET scan you wouldn't
have a PET scan without hexa kinase 2
and when I became interested in that
mystic model I called Junko who's done
more work with hexyl kinase 2 than
anybody and pete peterson's lab at johns
hopkins and asked her is there any other
time where hexyl kinase 2 is expressed
in cancer sis yeah very very early on in
embryogenesis
so a good theory has predictive power
this is exactly what you'd expect so
what does cancer doing this is just an
idea of the atavistic model if the
foundation of embryogenesis is that
built in pattern of replicative
immortality
you can't get rid of it right evolution
would get rid of cancer if it could but
it can't because it's the building block
of embryogenesis so what what cancer is
doing why it's reverting to this
glycolytic pathway it's hopscotching
back in time and unicellular life
evolved when there was dramatically less
oxygen in the atmosphere so the
glycolytic pathway is the most conserved
biochemical pathway and we've known this
for some time that the great oxygenation
events in the planet happened when
multicellular living took over and you
can see the met exact methylation
patterns that result in the over
expression the hexokinase too so why is
this important the important part how
does this matter to therapeutic strategy
we have to know what cancer is if we're
going to treat it and when you look back
at our tenure with cancer it's it's
always therapeutic strategies have
always stem from our understanding of it
when our understanding was simply that
it's pathological cell division that's
how we treated it with toxic
chemotherapy and then as we transition
to the air when the somatic mutation
theory became entrenched we transitioned
to this area of targeted medicine in the
late 70s early 80s and ever the
consensus view now is that's been a
dismal failure we've really haven't
budged life expectancies through
targeted therapy and why the most likely
explanations were not targeting the
driving cause behind this disease so new
these new theories Tom's theory that the
tissue field architecture that that
atavistic model they all guide treatment
strategy towards epigenetics so you can
do two ways you can exploit the
difference in expression between the
cancer cell and a normal sound or you
can try to engage the cancer cell and
diplomacy and these nuclear transfer
experiments and the tissue combination
recombination experiments show cancer
cells can be brought back into the
collective regardless of their
mutational profile so there's direct and
indirect strategies to do this direct
strategies are just using the language
of the epigenome and these drugs are
just getting started DNA
methyltransferase inhibitors histone
deacetylase inhibitors and very
excitingly packaged micro rna's I just
talked to a group at MIT that has
finally got em are micro are and i
stabilized these are non-coding RNA that
are responsible for a lot of gene
expression and they so these drugs are
coming and they they did a model of
triple negative breast cancer and
delivered two micro rna's with a
tremendous success so there's two of the
inhibitors there's micro RNAs are just
being experienced experimented with so
this is an exciting field indirect
strategies Paul Davis and Charlie Langer
have thought of many of these that
exploit the difference in expression and
one of them when you look at cancer
cells divest from modern genes so
theoretically they hop scotch pass the
adaptive immune system which evolved
about 400 million years ago and when
Davies looked back over
he noticed before sterile surgical
technique the literature is rife with
cancer patients getting terrible
infections that they live through but
then it sent their cancers into dramatic
remissions and then once sterile
surgical tech technique took over these
kind of vanished from the literature so
the idea is that cancer cells are much
more vulnerable to infectious disease
and this can be exploited I wonder the
60 minutes show where they talked the
viral therapy for glioblastoma where
they had tremendous success I wonder how
much of that is from the decoupling from
the immune system and of course
ketogenic diet and H ba which we're
going to talk a lot about the kids
probably uses two strategies it probably
uses this direct strategy and indirect
and that you're exploiting a difference
in expression you're attacking the cell
energetically you're just fighting
you're taking away its preferred energy
source also we know that the
relationship between oxygen and aerobic
metabolism and multicellular living is
so intimate and incredibly important so
there's probably a percentage when you
can restore aerobic metabolism through
this technique you're probably
recruiting many cells back into the
collective that way so take-home
messages somatic mutations are clearly
not the whole picture of cancer the
Cancer Genome Atlas Project is over
there is 10 to the 15th power bits of
data stored in computers throughout the
world
they've sequence 10,000 genomes there's
10 million mutations associated with
cancer and yet not a single mutational
profile is reliably diagnostic of any
type of cancer so it makes no sense
it's the dead theory in my opinion
they're shards of it the remain but as a
complete comprehensive explanation for
cancer it just it's not there cancer is
a systematic organized disease of
altered protein expression I just showed
you one altered protein expression hexa
kinase 2 and how wildly this is
important to cancer and it's ubiquitous
it's a 95% of cancers are pet positive
so it's this change and it's correlated
to the aggressiveness of the cancer as
well so of course this completely
reconfigured therapeutic strategy away
from the single sale hypothesis where we
still do are under this hypothesis that
cancers a fixed disease
the mutational theory we have to get rid
of every single cell and this is guided
strategy from combinational chemotherapy
to push harder and harder and harder but
what if we can do better than that what
if we can recruit cells into the
collective at the same time we're
potentiating them to react to
chemotherapy better so this is just
getting started and I think there's a
long way to go all right thank you two
questions
thank you very much for your time on the
question I have fastest recommendation
or differentiation engine I was on your
side about 10 years research in the last
years so it is the problem of
deportation involved problem movie
difference here the same basics you were
talking about but the different way so
you talk about go back in an atavistic
way it stays because the road properly
in an environment which is commutative
emotionally or mentally see ya so you're
saying that it cell differentiate
undulates it can go D differentiate and
then really differentiate well like a
good Ambu right right and you wouldn't
expect this in the India to visiting
form you just explained right it's not
we differentiated right okay
think about the recruiting NACA
collected you can make microsurgical
even to how well the what I in my mind
that for example ketone bodies are
signaling molecules and we don't know
the mechanisms but the signaling could
be to restore aerobic respiration which
is it powerful you know it really
reconfigures DNA it reconfigures its
expression and so forth so there could
be a percentage I don't think there's
direct evidence we funded a study in
Tom's lab that alluded to this the
restoring aerobic metabolism can recruit
potentially recruit cells back into
behaving normally